# Creating Data Warehouse using _AWS S3_ and _Redshift Cluster_ using the AWS Python SDK _boto3_

## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. In this project, we will build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from **AWS S3**, stages them in **Redshift**, and transforms data into a fact table and a set of dimensional tables for analytics purpose.

## Source

Our source data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app named `log_data`, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app named `song_data`.

#### Song data : `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are is an example of what a single json song file, looks like.

`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

#### Log Data : `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.


## Destination

The destination of the database is _Amazon Redshift Cluster_ which contains the star schema optimized analytics table for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

1.  **songplays** - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
* songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables

2. **users** - users in the app
* user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. **songs** - songs in music database
* song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. **artists** - artists in music database
* artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
* start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

Create the analytics tables in Redshift by running `create_tables.py` and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this. 

## ETL Pipeline

#### Song Data

1. Loading the song data using `COPY` into `song_staging` table from S3 bucket.
2. Using `song_staging` as a source, to load data into `songs` and `artists` if no records found impute them as NULL.
3. While inserting the data into `artists`, remove duplicate records and sort them by year.


#### Log Data

1. Loading the log data using `COPY` into `event_staging` table from S3 bucket.
2. Using `event_staging` as a source, load data into `users`. By ranking all the users with descending order of `ts` and filtered them for rank 1 only to ensure the latest value of `level` is partition. 
3. Using `event_staging` as a source, load data into `time`. We convert existing `ts` column into `TIMESTAMP` and extract the datetime attributes such as `hour`, `day`, `week`, `month`, `year`and `weekday`.
4. Using `event_staging` as a source, load data into `songplays` by filtering the rows which has `page == NextSong` only while performing LEfT JOIN on `songs` table to extract `song_id` and `artist_id` and if it dose not found mark `NULL`. 

## Run Instructions

1. Create a Redshift cluster using `CreateDWH_Iac.ipynb` Infrastructure-as-code example.
2. Make sure your Redshift cluster is active and credentials for data warehouse in `dwh.cfg` are accurate.
3. From shell run `create_tables.py`
4. From the shell run `etl.py`

## Note

**Do not forget to Clean up your AWS resources.**
